---
layout: blog
title: Introducing My Knowledge Lakehouse
category: non-fiction
---

1 There're only three entities: `log`, `list`, `structure`.

1.1 Everything goes into the `log` chronologically. It is the source of truth.

1.11 We refer to the smallest unit of content in `log` as `entry`.

1.111 `entry` can be anything really: an idea, a memory, a piece of information, a progress update of a task, a TODO item, a reference to another `entry`...

1.12 Immediacy and immutability matters. `entry`s are captured as they happen, never modified.

1.121 There's no room for auditing or forgetting. `entry`s are an authentic reflection of reality.

1.122 Efforts should be put to optimize the latency of the capture.

1.1221 Sometimes the primary tool is not available. An "always-on" secondary should take its place.

1.1222 Sometimes `log` from different tools or locations need to be "merged", "persisted". The general principle is to reduce manual steps (e.g. use a Web App that merges automatically), and do them daily at a fixed time and place (e.g. push to a git repository before going to bed).

1.123 In this sense, `log` is very similar to [Lab Notebooks](https://sambleckley.com/writing/lab-notebooks.html) (Sam Bleckley, 2020)

1.13 External context (if any) is part of the `entry`.

1.131 At the minimum, the title, author, and year of publish should be cited.

1.132 Better yet, use a personal URI system to reference local copies of the context, e.g. [Zotero snapshot](https://www.zotero.org/support/adding_items_to_zotero#saving_webpages), image, book.

1.14 There can be different types of `log`s. Different `log`s should represent completely different domains. Thoughts in these domains usually happen at different times and places.

1.142 I currently have three types of `log`s: journal, reading, worklog.

1.2 `list` and `structure` are derived from the `log`s.

1.21 A `list` references multiple `entry`s in the `log`.

1.211 `list` is a flat collection of `entry`s, contains nothing else.

1.212 The order of `entry`s in a `list` may be important, may be not. This is to say, you can treat the `list` either as an [`Array`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Array_(data_structure)), or as a [`Set`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_(mathematics)).

1.213 I have some `list`s [here](/collection.html), if you want to see.

1.22 A `structure` references multiple `entry`s in the `log`, in a hierarchical way.

1.221 The construction of a `structure` involves many thoughts that function as "glue". They can exist outside the `log`s.

1.2211 Think of the "glue" thoughts as the data member names when programming a [`struct`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Struct_(C_programming_language)). A name represents a particular angle to view an `entry`, an incomplete slice of an `entry`'s whole.

1.23 `list` and `structure` don't need to be exhaustive in what they are trying to collect. Unlike `log`s, the creation and maintenance of `list` and `structure` are performed asynchronously.

1.24 It is idiomatic to create `list`s using automation. For example, use a search and de-duplication script to create a `list` of all unfinished TODO items.

1.3 Yes, it's like a data lakehouse. `list` and `structure` are materialized views over the unstructured data stored in `log`s.

2 Reference to an internal `entry` is simply a pair of content and date.

2.1 The content is a copy or a paraphrase of the original `entry`.

2.11 Do repeat yourself, as contrary to [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself). Think of the content as a cache of the full `entry`.

2.2 The date is the creation time of the original `entry`.

2.21 The fact that unpacking a reference requires the reader to examine all `log`s from that entire day, facilitates re-discovery of old ideas.

2.22 References to an `entry` can be found easily with a search of that date. These references are commonly referred to as [backlinks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backlink), or [webmention](https://www.w3.org/TR/webmention/) in the context of netpages.

2.221 For `log`s that are not searchable (e.g. paper notebook), a searchable `list` needs to be created to bookkeep all references in them. It contains a set of `date1 (date2)`, where `date1` is the day being referenced, and `date2` is the day this reference is created. By searching for `date1`, we know `date2` is its backlink.

3 All `log`s are to be reviewed regularly, and randomly.

3.1 Through the course of re-reading, learn to remember past ambititions and melancholies. Learn to disagree with them, and in disagreement find a way forward.

3.2 Digital `log`s should be printed to physical books for the sake of reviewing.

3.21 Nothing compares to the feel of a physical book, especially when the purpose of reading is not to consume and complete.
